tidb-lightning: document max-error and duplicate-resolution (#7370)
pingcap/docs: tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-error-resolution.md

This article describes how to use use the type error feature (`lightning.max-error`) and the duplicate resolution feature (`tikv-importer.duplicate-resolution`). It also introduces the database where these errors are stored (`lightning.task-info-schema-name`). At the end of this article, it provides an example.

## Type error

> **Warning:**
>
> The TiDB Lightning type error (`lightning.max-error`) is an experimental feature. It is **NOT** recommended to only rely on it in the production environment.

You can use the configuration `lightning.max-error` to increase the tolerance of errors related to data types. If this is set to *N*, TiDB Lightning will allow and skip up to *N* errors from the data source before aborting. The default value 0 means any single error is fatal.

These errors are recorded in a database. After the import is completed, you can view the errors in the database and process them manually. For more information, see [Error Report](#Error-report).

{{< copyable "" >}}

```toml
[lightning]
max-error = 0
```

The following errors are governed by this configuration:

> * Invalid value (example: set `'Text'` to an INT column).
> * Numeric overflow (example: set 500 to a TINYINT column)
> * String overflow (example: set `'Very Long Text'` to a VARCHAR(5) column).
> * Zero date time (namely `'0000-00-00'` and `'2021-12-00'`).
> * Set NULL to a NOT NULL column.
> * Failed to evaluate a generated column expression.
> * Column count mismatch. Number of values in the row does not match number of columns of the table.
> * Unique/Primary key conflict in TiDB backend, when `on-duplicate = "error"`.
> * Any other SQL errors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Invalid values (example: set `'Text'` to an INT column).
* Numeric overflow (example: set `500` to a TINYINT column)
* String overflow (example: set `'Very Long Text'` to a VARCHAR(5) column).
* Zero date-time (namely `'0000-00-00'` and `'2021-12-00'`).
* Set NULL to a NOT NULL column.
* Failed to evaluate a generated column expression.
* Column count mismatch. The number of values in the row does not match the number of columns of the table.
* Unique/Primary key conflict in TiDB-backend, when `on-duplicate = "error"`.
* Any other SQL errors.
```

The following errors are always fatal, and cannot be skipped by changing `max-error`:

* Syntax error (such as unclosed quotation marks) in the original CSV, SQL or Parquet file.
* I/O, network or system permission errors.

> Unique/Primary key conflict in Local backend is handled separately, explained in the next section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unique/Primary key conflict in the Local-backend is handled separately and explained in the next section.
```

## Duplicate resolution in Local-backend mode

> Local-backend mode imports data by first converting them to KV pairs, and ingest them into TiKV in batches. Unlike the TiDB-backend mode, duplicate rows are not detected until the end of task. Therefore, duplicate errors in Local-backend mode is not controlled by `max-error`, but rather a separate configuration `duplicate-resolution`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the Local-backend mode, TiDB Lightning imports data by first converting them to KV pairs and ingesting the pairs into TiKV in batches. Unlike the TiDB-backend mode, duplicate rows are not detected until the end of a task. Therefore, duplicate errors in the Local-backend mode are not controlled by `max-error`, but rather by a separate configuration `duplicate-resolution`.
```

{{< copyable "" >}}

```toml
[tikv-importer]

> duplicate-resolution = 'record'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
duplicate-resolution = 'none'
```

Reviewer 2: LGTM

```

> There are three possible values of `duplicate-resolution`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The value options of `duplicate-resolution` are as follows:
```

* **'none'** — Do not detect duplicates. If a unique/primary key conflict does exist, the imported table will have inconsistent data and index, and will fail checksum check.

> * **'record'** — Detect duplicates, but do not attempt to fix it. If a unique/primary key conflict does exist, the imported table will have inconsistent data and index, and will fail checksum check.

Reviewer 3: @gozssky Please confirm this part

Reviewer 2: `will fail checksum check` -> `will skip checksum and report conflict errors count`

> * **'record'** — Detect duplicates, but do not attempt to fix it. If a unique/primary key conflict does exist, the imported table will have inconsistent data and index, and will fail checksum check.

Author: ```suggestion
* **'record'** — Detect duplicates, but do not attempt to fix it. If a unique/primary key conflict does exist, the imported table will have inconsistent data and index, and will skip checksum and report the count of the conflict error s.
```

> * **'none'** — Do not detect duplicates. If a unique/primary key conflict does exist, the imported table will have inconsistent data and index, and will fail checksum check.
> * **'record'** — Detect duplicates, but do not attempt to fix it. If a unique/primary key conflict does exist, the imported table will have inconsistent data and index, and will fail checksum check.
> * **'remove'** — Detect duplicates, and remove *all* duplicated rows. The imported table will be consistent, but the involved rows are ignored and have to be added back manually.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **'none'**: Does not detect duplicate data. If a unique/primary key conflict does exist, the imported table will have inconsistent data and index, and will fail checksum check.
* **'record'**: Detects duplicate data, but does not attempt to fix it. If a unique/primary key conflict does exist, the imported table will have inconsistent data and index, and will fail checksum check.
* **'remove'**: Detects duplicate data, and removes *all* duplicated rows. The imported table will be consistent, but the involved rows are ignored and have to be added back manually.
```

> TiDB Lightning duplicate resolution can only detect duplicates within the data source. It cannot handle conflict with existing data before running TiDB Lightning.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TiDB Lightning duplicate resolution can detect duplicate data only within the data source. This feature cannot handle conflict with existing data before running TiDB Lightning.
```

## Error report

All errors are written to tables in the `lightning_task_info` database in the downstream TiDB cluster. After the import is completed, you can view the errors in the database and process them manually.

You can change the database name by configuring `lightning.task-info-schema-name`.

{{< copyable "" >}}

```toml
[lightning]
task-info-schema-name = 'lightning_task_info'
```

> TiDB Lightning creates 3 tables inside this database:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TiDB Lightning creates 3 tables in this database:
```

```sql
CREATE TABLE syntax_error_v1 (
    task_id     bigint NOT NULL,
    create_time datetime(6) NOT NULL DEFAULT now(6),
    table_name  varchar(261) NOT NULL,
    path        varchar(2048) NOT NULL,
    offset      bigint NOT NULL,
    error       text NOT NULL,
    context     text
);

CREATE TABLE type_error_v1 (
    task_id     bigint NOT NULL,
    create_time datetime(6) NOT NULL DEFAULT now(6),
    table_name  varchar(261) NOT NULL,
    path        varchar(2048) NOT NULL,
    offset      bigint NOT NULL,
    error       text NOT NULL,
    row_data    text NOT NULL
);

CREATE TABLE conflict_error_v1 (
    task_id     bigint NOT NULL,
    create_time datetime(6) NOT NULL DEFAULT now(6),
    table_name  varchar(261) NOT NULL,
    index_name  varchar(128) NOT NULL,
    key_data    text NOT NULL,
    row_data    text NOT NULL,
    raw_key     mediumblob NOT NULL,
    raw_value   mediumblob NOT NULL,
    raw_handle  mediumblob NOT NULL,
    raw_row     mediumblob NOT NULL,
    KEY (task_id, table_name)
);
```

> **syntax_error_v1** is intended to record syntax error from files. It is not implemented yet.

Reviewer: 未生效的项要写入文档吗？

Author: 先注释掉了

> **syntax_error_v1** is intended to record syntax error from files. It is not implemented yet.

Author: ```suggestion
/**
**syntax_error_v1** is intended to record syntax error from files. It is not implemented yet.
**/
```

**type_error_v1** records all [type errors](#type-error) managed by the `max-error` configuration. There is one row per error.

> **conflict_error_v1** records all [unique/primary key conflict in local backend](#duplicate-resolution). There are 2 rows per pair of conflict.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**conflict_error_v1** records all [unique/primary key conflict in the Local-backend](#duplicate-resolution). There are 2 rows per pair of conflicts.
```

> | Column       | syntax | type | conflict | Explanation                                                                                                                         |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Column       | Syntax | Type | Conflict | Description                                                                                                                         |
```

| ------------ | ------ | ---- | -------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | task_id      | ✓      | ✓    | ✓        | The TiDB Lightning task ID generating this error                                                                                    |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| task_id      | ✓      | ✓    | ✓        | The TiDB Lightning task ID that generates this error                                                                                    |
```

> | create_table | ✓      | ✓    | ✓        | When the error was recorded                                                                                                         |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| create_table | ✓      | ✓    | ✓        | The time at which the error is recorded                                                                                                         |
```

> | table_name   | ✓      | ✓    | ✓        | Name of the table containing the error, in the form ``'`db`.`tbl`'``                                                                |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| table_name   | ✓      | ✓    | ✓        | The name of the table that contains the error, in the form of ``'`db`.`tbl`'``                                                                |
```

> | path         | ✓      | ✓    |          | Path of the file containing the error                                                                                               |
> | offset       | ✓      | ✓    |          | Byte position in the file where the error is found                                                                                  |
> | error        | ✓      | ✓    |          | Error message                                                                                                                       |
> | context      | ✓      |      |          | Text surrounding the error                                                                                                          |
> | index_name   |        |      | ✓        | Name of unique key in conflict. It is `'PRIMARY'` for primary key conflict                                                          |
> | key_data     |        |      | ✓        | Formatted key handle of the row causing the error. The content is for human reference only, and not intended to be machine readable |
> | row_data     |        | ✓    | ✓        | Formatted row data causing the error. The content is for human reference only, and not intended to be machine readable              |
> | raw_key      |        |      | ✓        | Key of the conflicted KV pair                                                                                                       |
> | raw_value    |        |      | ✓        | Value of the conflicted KV pair                                                                                                     |
> | raw_handle   |        |      | ✓        | Row handle of the conflicted row                                                                                                    |
> | raw_row      |        |      | ✓        | Encoded value of the conflicted row                                                                                                 |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| path         | ✓      | ✓    |          | The path of the file that contains the error                                                                                               |
| offset       | ✓      | ✓    |          | The byte position in the file where the error is found                                                                                  |
| error        | ✓      | ✓    |          | The error message                                                                                                                       |
| context      | ✓      |      |          | The text that surrounds the error                                                                                                          |
| index_name   |        |      | ✓        | The name of the unique key in conflict. It is `'PRIMARY'` for primary key conflicts.                                                          |
| key_data     |        |      | ✓        | The formatted key handle of the row that causes the error. The content is for human reference only, and not intended to be machine-readable. |
| row_data     |        | ✓    | ✓        | The formatted row data that causes the error. The content is for human reference only, and not intended to be machine-readable              |
| raw_key      |        |      | ✓        | The key of the conflicted KV pair                                                                                                       |
| raw_value    |        |      | ✓        | The value of the conflicted KV pair                                                                                                     |
| raw_handle   |        |      | ✓        | The row handle of the conflicted row                                                                                                    |
| raw_row      |        |      | ✓        | The encoded value of the conflicted row                                                                                                 |
```

> **Note:**
>

> > The error report records the file offset, not line/column number which is inefficient to obtain. You can quickly jump near a byte position (using 183 as example) with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> The error report records the file offset, not line/column number which is inefficient to obtain. You can quickly jump near a byte position (using 183 as example) using the following commands:
```

>

> > * shell, printing several lines before —

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> * shell, printing the first several lines.
```

>
>     ```shell
>     head -c 183 file.csv | tail
>     ```
>

> > * shell, printing several lines after —

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> * shell, printing the next several lines:
```

>
>     ```shell
>     tail -c +183 file.csv | head
>     ```
>
> * vim — `:goto 183` or `183go`

## Example

> In this example we prepare a data source with some known errors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, a data source is prepared with some known errors.
```

> 1. Prepare the database and table schemas.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Prepare the database and table schema.
```

    {{< copyable "shell-regular" >}}

    ```shell
    mkdir example && cd example

    echo 'CREATE SCHEMA example;' > example-schema-create.sql
    echo 'CREATE TABLE t(a TINYINT PRIMARY KEY, b VARCHAR(12) NOT NULL UNIQUE);' > example.t-schema.sql
    ```

2. Prepare the data.

    {{< copyable "shell-regular" >}}

    ```shell
    cat <<EOF > example.t.1.sql

        INSERT INTO t (a, b) VALUES
        (0, NULL),              -- column is NOT NULL
        (1, 'one'),
        (2, 'two'),
        (40, 'forty'),          -- conflicts with the other 40 below
        (54, 'fifty-four'),     -- conflicts with the other 'fifty-four' below
        (77, 'seventy-seven'),  -- the string is longer than 12 characters
        (600, 'six hundred'),   -- the number overflows TINYINT
        (40, 'fourty'),         -- conflicts with the other 40 above
        (42, 'fifty-four');     -- conflicts with the other 'fifty-four' above

    EOF
    ```

> 3. Configure TiDB Lightning enable strict SQL mode, use the local backend to import, resolve duplicates by deleting, and skip up to 10 errors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Configure TiDB Lightning to enable strict SQL mode, use the Local-backend to import data, delete duplicates, and skip up to 10 errors.
```

    {{< copyable "shell-regular" >}}

    ```shell
    cat <<EOF > config.toml

        [lightning]
        max-error = 10

        [tikv-importer]
        backend = 'local'
        sorted-kv-dir = '/tmp/lightning-tmp/'
        duplicate-resolution = 'remove'

        [mydumper]
        data-source-dir = '.'
        [tidb]
        host = '127.0.0.1'
        port = 4000
        user = 'root'
        password = ''
        sql-mode = 'STRICT_TRANS_TABLES,NO_ZERO_IN_DATE,NO_ZERO_DATE'

    EOF
    ```

4. Run TiDB Lightning. This command will exit successfully because all errors are skipped.

    {{< copyable "shell-regular" >}}

    ```shell
    tiup tidb-lightning -c config.toml
    ```

> 5. Verify that the imported table contains just the two normal rows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Verify that the imported table only contains the two normal rows:
```

    ```sql
    $ mysql -u root -h 127.0.0.1 -P 4000 -e 'select * from example.t'
    +---+-----+
    | a | b   |
    +---+-----+
    | 1 | one |
    | 2 | two |
    +---+-----+
    ```

> 6. Check that `type_error_v1` table caught the three rows involving type conversion:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. Check whether the `type_error_v1` table has caught the three rows involving type conversion:
```

        task_id: 1635888701843303564
    create_time: 2021-11-02 21:31:42.620090
     table_name: `example`.`t`
           path: example.t.1.sql
         offset: 46
          error: failed to cast value as varchar(12) CHARACTER SET utf8mb4 COLLATE utf8mb4_bin for column `b` (#2): [table:1048]Column 'b' cannot be null
       row_data: (0,NULL)

    *************************** 2. row ***************************
        task_id: 1635888701843303564
    create_time: 2021-11-02 21:31:42.627496
     table_name: `example`.`t`
           path: example.t.1.sql
         offset: 183
          error: failed to cast value as varchar(12) CHARACTER SET utf8mb4 COLLATE utf8mb4_bin for column `b` (#2): [types:1406]Data Too Long, field len 12, data len 13
       row_data: (77,'seventy-seven')

    *************************** 3. row ***************************
        task_id: 1635888701843303564
    create_time: 2021-11-02 21:31:42.629929
     table_name: `example`.`t`
           path: example.t.1.sql
         offset: 253
          error: failed to cast value as tinyint(4) for column `a` (#1): [types:1690]constant 600 overflows tinyint
       row_data: (600,'six hundred')
    ```

> 7. Check that `conflict_error_v1` table caught the four rows having unique/primary key conflicts:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7. Check whether the `conflict_error_v1` table has caught the four rows that have unique/primary key conflicts:
```

{{< copyable "" >}}

```toml
[lightning]
task-info-schema-name = 'lightning_task_info'
```

TiDB Lightning creates 3 tables in this database:

```sql
CREATE TABLE syntax_error_v1 (
    task_id     bigint NOT NULL,
    create_time datetime(6) NOT NULL DEFAULT now(6),
    table_name  varchar(261) NOT NULL,
    path        varchar(2048) NOT NULL,
    offset      bigint NOT NULL,
    error       text NOT NULL,
    context     text
);

CREATE TABLE type_error_v1 (
    task_id     bigint NOT NULL,
    create_time datetime(6) NOT NULL DEFAULT now(6),
    table_name  varchar(261) NOT NULL,
    path        varchar(2048) NOT NULL,
    offset      bigint NOT NULL,
    error       text NOT NULL,
    row_data    text NOT NULL
);

CREATE TABLE conflict_error_v1 (
    task_id     bigint NOT NULL,
    create_time datetime(6) NOT NULL DEFAULT now(6),
    table_name  varchar(261) NOT NULL,
    index_name  varchar(128) NOT NULL,
    key_data    text NOT NULL,
    row_data    text NOT NULL,
    raw_key     mediumblob NOT NULL,
    raw_value   mediumblob NOT NULL,
    raw_handle  mediumblob NOT NULL,
    raw_row     mediumblob NOT NULL,
    KEY (task_id, table_name)
);
```

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```
